MSC2964: Usage of OAuth 2.0 authorization code grant and refresh token grant (#2964)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/2964-oauth2-profile.md

> # MSC2964: Matrix profile for OAuth 2.0

Reviewer: Soru is not sure if these OAuth proposals in their current form work. There are a couple fundamental issues with them:

1. Bad UX: For native desktop clients and phone clients, the user is basically forced to be re-directed to the browser and complete login steps there. For web-clients the user is re-directed upon login to another website.
2. A possible mentioned work-around for the first issue was privileged clients, so that e.g. matrix.org privileges app.element.io. While that does not have to happen, if an easy solution to a bad UX issue is to introduce privileged clients, it *will* happen sooner or later, if we want or not.
3. This removes the ability for us to ever do something like #2957 or ever implement login with just one password for both authentication and SSSS:
3.1. OAuth steps are completed on the website --> we execute code to handle our password from the server. The entire point of #2957 is to *not* trust the server with this
3.2. We'd need to get the calculated SSSS key from webbrowser to client somehow
4. That only few clients implement SSO currently shows the high entry-barrier for client-dev if you want to login with SSO. Requiring OAuth for every login will significantly lift the entry barrier for new clients
5. for embedded/limited clients the idea proposed was that you need an external device w/ browser to complete the login

An idea would be to use oauth just for sso, and replace `m.login.sso` with `m.login.oauth` and introduce UIA to `/login` (#2835). While a server could chose to just always use oauth then, instead of "normal" login, this would negate all the extra stuff we would get by using OAuth scopes.

Another idea would be to *not* require a browser / browser-like environment to complete the needed OAuth steps, and (for point 3), *not* execute any code given by the server for being able to authenticate yourself.

Reviewer 2: I synced with @sandhose on this last week, as I share some of the same concerns above (and hadn't had a chance to discuss them before these MSCs were written)  Taking them point by point:

 1. Bad UX: In practice there are basically two auth flows in Matrix today - either basic username+password, or some kind of SSO which requires a web UI.  It's critical that we continue to support basic username+password for all the various Matrix clients and bots which use this, allowing them to have simple native UI (at the expense of the security dubiousness of encouraging people to hand their main account password over to some random native app).  For other flows, we already need the ability to bounce through a web UI, and in practice we've seen several major security issues due to inventing those flows ourselves rather than leveraging OAuth - so I see the appeal here in switching to an existing standard.  Am I missing a native auth flow that wouldn't be covered by this?  Meanwhile, if you're on a basic client and want to get an OAuth scope, the client can provide a URI to let the user finish the auth in a web browser - this feels like an improvement on the current situation.
 2. Given your server is the one authing your login, not your client, it doesn't seem unreasonable that if the server doesn't know if it can trust the client, the server should be the one displaying the UI (webpage) needed to auth the client.  However, if your server wants to specialcase some known trusted clients to let them iframe the server SSO flow, that doesn't seem unreasonable, and would improve common cases where a given server steers new users into using a default client without making things worse for other clients.
 3. Totally agreed that this is in conflict with MSC #2957 - i've asked @sandhose to go figure out how to fix that, as cryptographic login is super desirable.  (It's worth noting that cryptographic login is in general incompatible with SSO however, so perhaps it just ends up being a separate login flow alongside the basic auth one for non-SSO situations?)
 4. Totally agreed we should keep plain login around too.
 5. Solved by keeping plain login around too.

However, I'm not sure that the right solution is to turn `m.login.sso` into `m.login.oauth` and add UIA to `/login`.  We then end up with both the complexity of UIA *and* OAuth2 flying around.  Instead, how about we aim to have 3 separate login flows: plain login, OAuth (covering all SSO), and cryptologin?

The main flaw I see is that we'd need a place to support TOTP-style 2FA such that it works for all flows if configured (it feels suboptimal to make it SSO-only, given cryptologin + 2FA sounds very desirable, for instance)

Reviewer: Generally sounds good, yes. Another issue would be that with plain login we don't have the scope management.

As for the concerns, the issue is that for TOTP (or basically any other 2fa) we need more back-and-forth communication one way or another. The cryptographic authentication might also require that (while no exact flows are layd out yet in the MSC, a login does require a few requests back-and-forth). It seems to soru that the simplest solution for that is adding UIA to `/login`, but yes, i seems like duplicate work.

Reviewer 3: >  Instead, how about we aim to have 3 separate login flows: plain login, OAuth (covering all SSO), and cryptologin?

I'm not entirely convinced by this. Some servers (of which matrix.org will soon be one) allow either username/password or SSO (via social login). If we split username/pass and OAuth into two separate flows, we effectively undo the work we did for social login in presenting the Identity Providers next to the username/password box, since we're now back to "log into matrix.org" (without knowing *anything* on the client side about what auth mechanisms matrix.org might offer).

Of course that's a problem with OAuth generally, but at least if the username/password mechanism follows the same flow as other logins, we don't get this jarring "username/password" vs "everything else".

There is another problem with Social Login, which is solved by having the server manage the choice of login flow (OAuth-stylee), which is: how to correctly brand login buttons without having to have support for every conceivable brand in every client.

I'm not sure I want to discuss this further here; the point is basically that I think we need to take a hard look at whether what we have designed for Social Login is the right solution, or whether we need to do something more OAuthy.

To pick up a couple of other points:

@Sorunome wrote:

> 4. That only few clients implement SSO currently shows the high entry-barrier for client-dev if you want to login with SSO. Requiring OAuth for every login will significantly lift the entry barrier for new clients

Disagree. I'm not convinced the entry barrier for SSO is any higher than username/pass, since it's just a couple of redirects; the server takes care of most of it. IMHO the reason few clients implement SSO is because there is no need to: few *servers* currently implement SSO.

@ara4n wrote
> [re embedded clients]
> Solved by keeping plain login around too.

except it's not, is it? It only solves it for servers which choose to offer a username/password flow, with no 2FA? That might work for specific deployments, but it doesn't sound like a general solution.

Reviewer 4: @richvdh 
> https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2785Disagree. I'm not convinced the entry barrier for SSO is any higher than username/pass, since it's just a couple of redirects; the server takes care of most of it. IMHO the reason few clients implement SSO is because there is no need to: few servers currently implement SSO.

I think the issue here is not really the code needed to do the requests but actually that there might be a webpage to be displayed to do the actual SSO. Which usually tends to be hard for native desktop apps and TUI clients as those have a harder time communicating with a browser (and with those that do js sometimes even). Thats in my opinion the main challenge of SSO currently. Though if OAuth gives token/code based auth (as google does it for example) this would be an upgrade and make this easier. (google shows you a token a user can easily copy from their browser so the client doesnt need to spin up a local server to redirect too or similar).

Also I agree with @richvdh on the embedding part (basicly what I said above).

I overall do like having oauth in the spec as a main login thing but I have the feeling in the current proposal it either breaks many clients and servers at once or atleast clutters the login process. I personally like the feature proposed but not the way it is implemented. Though I cannot offer another solution to this.

Reviewer 3: OAuth2 in general is now dealt with by https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3861, so further discussion on this, if needed, should happen there.

> The current authentication mechanisms in Matrix does look like a lot like OAuth 2.0 without most of its security mechanisms.

Reviewer: UIA and OAuth have two different goals, though. OAuth could be e.g. a UIA stage

Author: While it is still under discussion, the end goal is to completely replace the current authentication mechanism of Matrix with OAuth 2.0, not add OAuth as a UIA stage. This series of MSC are written with this in mind

This MSC is part of a change to replace Matrix authentication mechanisms with OAuth 2.0.
This MSC in particular defines how clients should authenticate with OAuth 2.0 to access the Matrix Client-to-Server API.

## Proposal

### Terminology

**OAuth 2.0** is an authentication framework. Authentication systems are built on top of OAuth2. It is based on numerous RFCs by the IETF.

**OpenID Connect** is a set of specifications defining a standard auth system built on top of OAuth2. Often abbreviated OIDC. Specs to know about: OIDC Core defines the actual auth system, OIDC Discovery defines the discovery of OP metadata, OIDC Registration allows clients to register themselves dynamically.

> An **Authorization/Authentication Server** (AS) or **OIDC Provider** (OP) in the context of OIDC is the service that fulfills an authentication request. In the context of Matrix, it is either the homeserver itself acting as the OP or an external one like Keycloak, Auth0, etc.

Reviewer: Can we try to find a different acronym, please? AS is already used in the matrix world for Application Service, making it a bit confusing to read ^^

Author: Fair point. Those acronyms are pretty standard in the OAuth 2.0 world, but while I did not state that the AS used should be OIDC-compliant (because there are no need for that for now) I think I'll need that in further MSCs, especially when I start to touch to widgets/integrations. I'll probably explicit that and use the "OP" acronym instead of "AS".

Reviewer 5: I've added some changes to use OP instead of AS and added a comment about the overlap. Hopefully this clarifies the situation.

These clients must be capable to redirect the user to have them interact with the authentication server.

As with native and public browser-based clients, they must use the authorization code flow to obtain authorization.
Those clients are confidential and must authenticate their requests to the authorization server with their client credentials.

The authorization must issue refresh tokens for those type of clients if requested by them.

#### TBD

Restricted input clients like TVs might use the [Device Authorization Grant](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8628).
CLI tools might use the [Client Credentials Grant](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-4.4).

The details of those are still TBD.

### Requests to the authorization endpoint

When making a request to the authorization endpoint, clients must provide an unpredicatble value for the `state` parameter and validate it when returning to the redirect URI.
They must ensure the `state` value is securely tied to the current session.

The redirect URIs used by the clients must match exactly with the ones registered to prevent open redirection attaks.
The full redirect URI must be included in the authorization request.

> The client might include a login hint to what MXID the user is trying to use.

Reviewer: So far the spec only requires a username on login and `/login` then returns the MXID. At work we actually utilize this so that the login username has nothing to do with the MXID you have in the end.

Reviewer 6: I would like to see some more info on what a "login hint to what MXID" is. Can that be the username or does it have to be the mxid? Does the client now have to do the mxid mapping, that so far was pretty much implementation defined?

Reviewer 7: If I understood correctly, like the name suggests, it's only a hint, to avoid the user having to enter their MXID/username several times.

For example, with a client you would have these steps:
1. The user enters a MXID in the client to login.
2. The client discovers the homeserver from the MXID, according to the spec. While doing that it also sees that the homeserver supports OIDC.
3. The client directs the user to the OIDC auth server, and inserts in the request the MXID that the user entered as a login hint.
4. The user opens the login page on the auth server, and the username field is pre-filled according to the MXID that was provided.

In no way it should limit the choice of username for the user, or force the auth server or homeserver to use it. That's what I understand of the intentions for that field from the OIDC spec anyway.

Although ultimately the auth server is free to do whatever it pleases and might also ignore this parameter altogether.

I would guess it's also up to the auth server and homeserver to decide if the username used for authentication matches the one in the MXID. Irc, it's already the case in Synapse's OIDC config where one can chose to map the username from the auth server to anything else.

Reviewer 6: Well, often clients actually use separate fields for server and username (or the server is even preconfigured). Users then just enter "FirstName LastName", so would that be an acceptible login hint or does it have to be an mxid?

Reviewer 3: looks like `login_hint` has been removed altogether, so this thread is outdated

- complete a CAPTCHA (`m.login.recaptcha`)
- agree to terms of services and privacy policies (`m.login.terms`, [MSC1692](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1692))
- TOTP/2FA (`m.login.totp`, [MSC2271](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2271))

All of this can be done by the authentication server without any modification to the specification.

### Replacement of UIA

Some API endpoints use User-Interactive Authentication to perform some higher-privileged operations, like deleting a device or adding a 3PID.
An equivalent behaviour can be achieved by temporarily upgrade the client authorization with additional scopes.

Whenever the client ask for a token (either with a refresh token or by initiating a authorization code flow) the authentication server returns the list of scopes for which the token is valid.
This helps client track what scopes they currently have access to, and let them upgrade temporarily a token with additional scopes to perform privileged actions.
The authorization server can also downgrade the scopes of a session after a certain time by returning a reduced list of scopes when refreshing the token.

> The scope definitions are out of scope of this MSC and are defined in [MSC2967](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2967).

Reviewer 8: Couldn't this be the client requesting for a seperate token with *only* the required scope to perform this action, only for it to be dropped (deactivated) immidiately after?

Something about upgrading the same token doesn't sit well with me from a security perspective, it might be a deliberately locked-down token, and/or multiple actions at once could race to upgrade/downgrade the current token.

Reviewer 9: Having a separate token purely for one scope / set of scopes sounds like a really good idea, especially for race condition reasons. Races could be also avoided by introducing state on AS/OP side, but that is quite out of scope of oauth2 specification (if I'm not mistaken)

At the same time, it would make specification compatible with more possible OP implementations.

Making it single use would be easily doable using [jti](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519#section-4.1.7) claim on that token.

Reviewer 10: (considering resolved - if this feels untrue, please open a new thread)

### User registration

User can register themselves by initiating a authorization code flow with the `prompt=create` parameter as defined in [_Initiating User Registration via OpenID Connect - draft 03_](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-prompt-create-1_0.html).

### Logging out

TBD. [OIDC Frontchannel logout](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-frontchannel-1_0.html) might be helpful.

## Potential issues

There are still many open questions that need to be adressed in future MSCs.
This includes:

- using OAuth 2.0 to authenticate application services
- account management, including active session management
- interactions with widgets and integrations
- 3PID logins
- guest logins

The current authentication mechanism will be deprecated later on, but a migration period where the two authentication mechanisms cohabit needs to exist.
This is doable in clients but harder to do in servers.
One requirement for a smooth migration is to adopt [MSC2918](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2918).
The migration path and the deprecation of the current APIs will be done in a separate MSC.

## Alternatives

> None relevant.

Reviewer: Listing expanding and adding UIA to the `/login` endpoint does sound like a relevant alternative here.

Reviewer 5: 👍 This has been added to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/hughns/delegated-oidc-architecture/proposals/3861-delegated-oidc-architecture.md#alternatives

# MSC2964: Delegation of auth from homeserver to OIDC Provider

The current authentication mechanisms in Matrix looks a lot like OAuth 2.0 without most of its security hardening mechanisms.

This MSC is part of an architectural change to replace the existing Matrix authentication mechanisms with OAuth 2.0. A fundamental change is that access tokens will no longer be issued by the homeserver and instead will be issued by an auth server (OIDC Provider) directly to the Matrix client.

This MSC in particular defines how clients should authenticate with the OIDC Provider to obtain the access token used to access the Matrix Client-to-Server API.

## Proposal

### Terminology

> **OAuth 2.0** is an authentication framework. Authentication systems are built on top of OAuth2. It is based on numerous RFCs by the IETF.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
**OAuth 2.0** is an authorization framework. Authentication systems are built on top of OAuth2. It is based on numerous RFCs by the IETF.
```

Some nitpicking: OAuth 2.0 clearly states that it only specifies authorization. Even OIDC is not necessarily an authentication protocol because it mainly makes some information from the (out-of-spec) authentication process that happened on the authorization server available to the RP. Granted, JWTs are often used as access tokens that have similar information and validation processes as the ID Token from OIDC.

**OpenID Connect** is a set of specifications defining a standard auth system built on top of OAuth2. Often abbreviated OIDC. Specs to know about: OIDC Core defines the actual auth system, OIDC Discovery defines the discovery of OP metadata, OIDC Registration allows clients to register themselves dynamically.

> An **Authorization/Authentication Server** (AS - as this acronym is already used to refer to Application Service in Matrix we will avoid it) or **OIDC Provider** (OP) in the context of OIDC is the service that fulfills an authentication request. In the context of Matrix, it is either the homeserver itself acting as the OP or an external one like Keycloak, Auth0, etc.

Reviewer 11: This MSC sometimes uses "Authorization Server" and "Authentication Server". Afaik, the official OAuth 2.0 name for the AS would be "Authorization Server", so I would propose to use it everywhere.

Reviewer 5: Due to the existing use of Application Service as a term in Matrix I have instead standardised on OP and OpenID Provider (which I believe is most correct compared to "OIDC Provider" or "OIDC provider")

# MSC2964: Usage of OAuth 2.0 authorization code grant and refresh token grant

This proposal is part of the broader [MSC3861: Next-generation auth for Matrix, based on OAuth 2.0/OIDC][MSC3861].

This MSC in particular defines how clients can leverage the OAuth 2.0 authorization code grant to gain access to the Matrix Client-to-Server API.

## Proposal

### Prerequisites

This proposal requires the client to know the following authorization server metadata about the homeserver:

> - `authorization_endpoint`: the URL where the user is able to access the authorization endpoint to initiate the login flow
> - `token_endpoint`: the URL where the user is able to access the token endpoint to exchange the authorization code for an access token
>   verify the signature of the ID Token
> - `response_types_supported`: a JSON array of response types supported by the authorization endpoint
> - `grant_types_supported`: a JSON array of grant types supported by the authorization endpointn defined in [RFC8414] and used in [RFC6749]
> - `response_mode_supported`: a JSON array of response modes supported by the authorization endpoint

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
- `authorization_endpoint`: the URL where the user should be sent to initiate the login flow
- `token_endpoint`: the URL where the client is able to exchange the authorization code for an access token
- `response_types_supported`: a JSON array of response types supported by the authorization endpoint
- `grant_types_supported`: a JSON array of grant types supported by the authorization endpoint defined in [RFC8414] and used in [RFC6749]
- `response_mode_supported`: a JSON array of response modes supported by the authorization endpoint
```
- `authorization_endpoint` could be phrased better
- `token_endpoint` is interacted by the client, not really the user
- "verify the signature of the ID Token" below `token_endpoint` seems like a leftover from something
- typo on `grant_types_supported` explanation

> All of those metadata values are well-defined in [RFC8414] and used in varioud MSCs like [RFC6749].

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
All of those metadata values are well-defined in [RFC8414] and used in various RFCs like [RFC6749].
```

Sample failed authorization:

```
https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback#state=ewubooN9weezeewah9fol4oothohroh3&error=access_denied&error_description=The+resource+owner+or+authorization+server+denied+the+request.&error_uri=https%3A%2F%2Ferrors.example.com%2F
```

#### Token request

The client then exchanges the authorization code to obtain an access token using the token endpoint.

This is done by making a POST request to the `token_endpoint` with the following parameters, encoded as `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` in the body:

- The `grant_type` set to `authorization_code`
- The `code` obtained from the callback
- The `redirect_uri` used in the authorization request
- The `client_id` value
- The `code_verifier` value generated at the start of the authorization flow

The server replies with a JSON object containing the access token, the token type, the expiration time, and the refresh token.

Sample token request:

```
POST /oauth2/token HTTP/1.1
Host: account.example.com
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
Accept: application/json

grant_type=authorization_code
  &code=iuB7Eiz9heengah1joh2ioy9ahChuP6R

>   &redirect_uri=https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
  &redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fapp.example.com%2Foauth2-callback
```
URL encoding

Author: Same here, this is done for readability

# MSC2964: Usage of OAuth 2.0 authorization code grant and refresh token grant

This proposal is part of the broader [MSC3861: Next-generation auth for Matrix, based on OAuth 2.0/OIDC][MSC3861].

> This MSC in particular defines how clients can leverage the OAuth 2.0 authorization code grant to gain access to the Matrix Client-to-Server API.

Reviewer 12: Since the rework, there is nothing specifying what clients should do when logging out

Reviewer 10: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4254

The rationale for using the system browser is explained in [MSC3861], under "Motivation" → "Benefits of authenticating end-users through the system browser".

---

Sample authorization request (broken down into multiple lines for readability), with the following values:

- `authorization_endpoint` set to `https://account.example.com/oauth2/auth`, obtained through [MSC2965]
- `client_id` set to `s6BhdRkqt3`, obtained through [MSC2966]
- `redirect_uri` set to `https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback`
- `state` set to `ewubooN9weezeewah9fol4oothohroh3`
- `response_mode` set to `fragment`
- `code_verifier` set to `ogie4iVaeteeKeeLaid0aizuimairaCh`
- `code_challenge` computed as `72xySjpngTcCxgbPfFmkPHjMvVDl2jW1aWP7-J6rmwU`
- `scope` set to `urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:AAABBBCCCDDD` (as per [MSC2967])

```
https://account.example.com/oauth2/auth?
    client_id     = s6BhdRkqt3 &
    response_type = code &
    response_mode = fragment &

>     redirect_uri  = https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback &
>     scope         = urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:AAABBBCCCDDD &

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
    redirect_uri  = https%3A%2F%2Fapp.example.com%2Foauth2-callback &
    scope         = urn%3Amatrix%3Aclient%3Aapi%3A*+urn%3Amatrix%3Aclient%3Adevice%3AAAABBBCCCDDD &
```
These values would be URL encoded

Author: I kept this part simplified with no URL-encoding and extra spaces. It might be worth saying that, and give the actual url-encoded, with no space added URL in addition

Reviewer 12: The values are already listed above in their non-url-encoded format. The oauth specs also include line breaks in their examples but url-encode the values

# MSC2964: Usage of OAuth 2.0 authorization code grant and refresh token grant

This proposal is part of the broader [MSC3861: Next-generation auth for Matrix, based on OAuth 2.0/OIDC][MSC3861].

This MSC in particular defines how clients can leverage the OAuth 2.0 authorization code grant to gain access to the Matrix Client-to-Server API.

## Proposal

### Prerequisites

> This proposal requires the client to know the following authorization server metadata about the homeserver:

Reviewer 7: Don't we also need `code_challenge_methods_supported` for the PKCE methods?

Author: because it's a *requirement*, I think the client can just assume the server supports it? I don't really have a strong opinion over this

Reviewer 7: Ah I see what you mean. I don't have a strong opinion either, I was just trying to be thorough :wink:.

- `response_types_supported`: a JSON array of response types supported by the authorization endpoint
- `grant_types_supported`: a JSON array of grant types supported by the authorization endpoint defined in [RFC8414] and used in [RFC6749]
- `response_mode_supported`: a JSON array of response modes supported by the authorization endpoint

All of those metadata values are well-defined in [RFC8414] and used in various RFCs like [RFC6749].

The discovery of the above metadata is out of scope for this MSC, and is currently covered by [MSC2965](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2965).

The client must also have a `client_id` to use with this flow.
How the client obtains this is out of scope for this MSC, and is currently covered by [MSC2966](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2966).

### Authorization code grant

As per [RFC6749], the authorization code grant lets the client obtain an access token through a browser redirect.

Because this flow has various parameters and security improvements added by other specifications, this describes what is enforced and required to support by the client and the homeserver.

Homeservers and clients must:

> - support PKCE as per [RFC7636]

Reviewer 7: Since it seems that using the `S256` method is required below, maybe it should be mentioned here?

It should do this only if it can guarantee that in case a response with a new refresh token is not received and stored by the client, retrying the request with the old refresh token will succeed.

The homeserver should consider that the session is compromised if an old, invalidated refresh token is being used, and should revoke the session.

### Sample flow

#### Flow parameters

The client must know the following parameters, through ways described in [MSC2965], [MSC2966] and [MSC2967]:

- `authorization_endpoint`: the URL where the user is able to access the authorization endpoint to initiate the login flow
- `token_endpoint`: the URL where the user is able to access the token endpoint to exchange the authorization code for an access token
- `client_id`: the unique identifier allocated for the client
- `redirect_uri`: the URI where the user is redirected after the authorization flow used by this client
- `scope`: the scope of the access token to request
- `response_mode`: the response mode to use, either `fragment` or `query`. It must be `fragment` if the `redirect_uri` is an HTTPS URI, and can be `query` otherwise

> It needs to generate the following values:
> 
> - Generate a random value for the `state`
> - Generate a random value for the `code_verifier`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It needs to generate the following values:

- a random value for the `state`
- a random value for the `code_verifier`
```

#### Authorization request

> It then constructs the authorization request URL using the `authorization_endpoint` value, with the following query parameters:

Reviewer 13: OAuth also has [Pushed Authorization Requests](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9126) which attempt to alleviate some of the issues of query parameters (see e.g. the [introduction of RFC9126](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9126#name-introduction)). I wonder if it'd be worth to consider these from the outset here?

Author: This is a good point, although because most Matrix clients will be public clients, we wouldn't really gain from the cryptographic integrity or confidentiality advantages PAR gives us. It would help us in two other ways though:

 - validating the authorisation request earlier, to possibly show a user-friendly error within the client
 - large authorisation requests, if we start having fine-grained authorisations

This is why for now, I'd prefer leaving them out of the proposal for the sake of simplicity, and introduce them later (probably alongside [RAR](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9396)) when we actually need it

Reviewer 13: Makes sense and sounds fair to me. 👍

Reviewer 10: (it would be good to have this alternative documented in the MSC)

Author: Added that in the alternatives in cf170e00

- The `response_type` value set to `code`
- The `client_id` value
- The `redirect_uri` value
- The `scope` value
- The `state` value
- The `response_mode` value
- The `code_challenge` computed from the `code_verifier` value using the SHA-256 algorithm, as described in [RFC7636]
- The `code_challenge_method` set to `S256`

This authorization request URL must be opened in the user's browser:

> - For web-based clients, this can be done through a rediretion or by opening the URL in a new tab

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- For web-based clients, this can be done through a redirection or by opening the URL in a new tab
```

- For native clients, this can be done by opening the URL:
  - using the system browser
  - through platform-specific APIs when available, such as [`ASWebAuthenticationSession`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/authenticationservices/aswebauthenticationsession) on iOS or [Android Custom Tabs](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/android/custom-tabs) on Android

The rationale for using the system browser is explained in [MSC3861], under "Motivation" → "Benefits of authenticating end-users through the system browser".

> ---

Reviewer 3: unfortunately, github renders this hr rather heavily, making it look like we're starting a completely new chapter in the MSC. I think it's probably clearer to get rid of it.

Likewise elsewhere.

Author: I've replaced those with subsections in 3fc09a67

- `code_challenge` computed as `72xySjpngTcCxgbPfFmkPHjMvVDl2jW1aWP7-J6rmwU`
- `scope` set to `urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:AAABBBCCCDDD` (as per [MSC2967])

```
https://account.example.com/oauth2/auth?
    client_id     = s6BhdRkqt3 &
    response_type = code &
    response_mode = fragment &
    redirect_uri  = https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback &
    scope         = urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:AAABBBCCCDDD &
    state         = ewubooN9weezeewah9fol4oothohroh3 &
    code_challenge        = 72xySjpngTcCxgbPfFmkPHjMvVDl2jW1aWP7-J6rmwU &
    code_challenge_method = S256
```

#### Callback

Once completed, the user is redirected to the `redirect_uri`, with either a successful or failed authorization in the URL fragment or query parameters.
Whether the parameter are in the URL fragment or query parameters is determined by the `response_mode` value:

- if set to `fragment`, the parameters will be placed in the URL fragment, like `https://example.com/callback#param1=value1&param2=value2`
- if set to `query`, the parameters will be in placed the query string, like `https://example.com/callback?param1=value1&param2=value2`

> Public clients with an HTTPS redirect URI must use the `fragment` response mode, as the fragment is not sent to the server in the redirect.

Reviewer 3: what exactly is meant by a "public client"? I can guess, but I think we should maybe be more explicit.

Author: This is because OAuth distinguishes public and confidential clients. Public clients don't have any private secret authenticating with them (like a 'client secret'). I don't think this distinction is useful in the Matrix use case for now at least, as all clients are public ones. Removed that in a26e7a63addb8ad7e618dbb03cd7f5423912ae25

}
```

The access token must be short-lived and should be refreshed using the `refresh_token` when expired.

#### Token refresh

When the access token expires, the client must refresh it by making a POST request to the `token_endpoint` with the following parameters, encoded as `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` in the body:

- The `grant_type` set to `refresh_token`
- The `refresh_token` obtained from the token response
- The `client_id` value

The server replies with a JSON object containing the new access token, the token type, the expiration time, and a new refresh token.
The old refresh token is no longer valid and should be discarded.

Sample token refresh:

```
POST /oauth2/token HTTP/1.1
Host: account.example.com
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
Accept: application/json

grant_type=refresh_token
  &refresh_token=tGz3JOkF0XG5Qx2TlKWIA
  &client_id=s6BhdRkqt3
```

```json
{
  "access_token": "2YotnFZFEjr1zCsicMWpAA",
  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "expires_in": 299,
  "refresh_token": "tGz3JOkF0XG5Qx2TlKWIA",
  "scope": "urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:AAABBBCCCDDD"
}
```

### User registration

> User can register themselves by initiating a authorization code flow with the `prompt=create` parameter as defined in [Initiating User Registration via OpenID Connect 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-prompt-create-1_0.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Users can register themselves by initiating an authorization code flow with the `prompt=create` parameter as defined in [Initiating User Registration via OpenID Connect 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-prompt-create-1_0.html).
```

> # MSC2964: Usage of OAuth 2.0 authorization code grant and refresh token grant

Reviewer 14: Is there anything Matrix specific about this MSC? It seems to be standard OIDC RFCs?

Author: What is specific to Matrix is the set of requirements, like

 - using the auth code grant (and not the implicit/hybrid flows)
 - use PKCE
 - refresh token rotation
 - strict redirect URI validation

You're right that this isn't defining anything new. OpenID also has 'profiles' (like [FAPI 2.0](https://openid.net/specs/fapi-security-profile-2_0-final.html)) which don't really define anything new, but rather set some strict requirements for a specific use

Reviewer 14: So this is defining a "profile" (a minimum set of features which must be supported) for Matrix?

Author: Kinda, yes. We don't have to adopt that vocabulary though. Profiles defined by some OpenID specs are shorter, as it is intended for people already familiar with OAuth/OIDC, so they can just say 'use X and Y with parameter A and B'

- For native clients, this can be done by opening the URL:
  - using the system browser
  - through platform-specific APIs when available, such as [`ASWebAuthenticationSession`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/authenticationservices/aswebauthenticationsession) on iOS or [Android Custom Tabs](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/android/custom-tabs) on Android

The rationale for using the system browser is explained in [MSC3861], under "Motivation" → "Benefits of authenticating end-users through the system browser".

##### Sample authorization request

Sample authorization request (broken down into multiple lines for readability), with the following values:

- `authorization_endpoint` set to `https://account.example.com/oauth2/auth`, obtained through [MSC2965]
- `client_id` set to `s6BhdRkqt3`, obtained through [MSC2966]
- `redirect_uri` set to `https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback`
- `state` set to `ewubooN9weezeewah9fol4oothohroh3`
- `response_mode` set to `fragment`
- `code_verifier` set to `ogie4iVaeteeKeeLaid0aizuimairaCh`
- `code_challenge` computed as `72xySjpngTcCxgbPfFmkPHjMvVDl2jW1aWP7-J6rmwU`

> - `scope` set to `urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:AAABBBCCCDDD` (as per [MSC2967])

Reviewer 3: could you clarify where this `AAABBBCCCDDD` comes from? Is the client expected to generate it? Presumably it needs to be unique? How can a client ensure that?

This is quite a difference from how things work in practice with `/login`. I know that `/login` allows you to specify a device_id, but it's rarely used.  If we want to change this model, it could do with more discussion than this implication.

Author: I've 'moved' this discussion/decision in MSC2967. I've clarified what this scope means exactly in 484cff15

```
https://account.example.com/oauth2/auth?
    client_id     = s6BhdRkqt3 &
    response_type = code &
    response_mode = fragment &
    redirect_uri  = https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback &
    scope         = urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:AAABBBCCCDDD &
    state         = ewubooN9weezeewah9fol4oothohroh3 &
    code_challenge        = 72xySjpngTcCxgbPfFmkPHjMvVDl2jW1aWP7-J6rmwU &
    code_challenge_method = S256
```

#### Callback

Once completed, the user is redirected to the `redirect_uri`, with either a successful or failed authorization in the URL fragment or query parameters.
Whether the parameter are in the URL fragment or query parameters is determined by the `response_mode` value:

- if set to `fragment`, the parameters will be placed in the URL fragment, like `https://example.com/callback#param1=value1&param2=value2`
- if set to `query`, the parameters will be in placed the query string, like `https://example.com/callback?param1=value1&param2=value2`

> Clients with an HTTPS redirect URI must use the `fragment` response mode, as the fragment is not sent to the server in the redirect.

Author: This is indeed not well written. Here "HTTPS redirect URI" is to mean "not using a custom redirect scheme" e.g. native apps. This is a recommendation as most web-based clients are client-side only, so we ideally don't want to disclose the `code` sent back in the parameters to the server. If we use query parameters they are sent to the web server, if we use the URL fragment, they are not

> Clients with an HTTPS redirect URI must use the `fragment` response mode, as the fragment is not sent to the server in the redirect.

Author: I reworded this in 91f5b76e, please reopen if it's not clear enough
